README.md, before:

# swt16
A sweet 16 bit processor

## Overview
This project contains a register transfer level (RTL) description of a 16-bit processor with a classic five stage RISC pipeline.
The RTL description is done in Verilog.

The pipeline stages are instruction fetch (FE), decode (DC), execute (EX), memory access (MEM), and register writeback (WB).
Regarding memory interfaces, the processor is designed according to the Harvard architecture, i.e., it has separate program and data memories.
More information on the classic five stage pipeline on [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classic_RISC_pipeline).
Currently, the processor design implements bypassing/forwarding, but does not implement pipeline stalling (it is planned, though).

This project also contains a simulator for the RTL design.
The RTL simulator is built using [Verilator](https://www.veripool.org/).
Verilator is open source. It can be downloaded from Github or obtained from the Ubuntu packet manager.

## Directory structure
```
├── bench        : Simulator directory
├── doc          : ISA documentation
├── prog         : Example / test programs
├── README.md    : This readme
└── rtl          : Processor description in Verilog
```
## Prerequisites
Make sure Verilator is installed before attempting to run or build the simulator.
If you want to visualize the processor state during the simulation, you will also need [GTKWAVE](http://gtkwave.sourceforge.net/).
To install Verilator and GTKWAVE, execute the following command (on Ubuntu Linux):

`sudo apt-get install verilator gtkwave`

## Building the simulator
Build the simulator by calling make from [bench]. After that, the simulator will be located in [bench/swt16/Vswt16_top].

`cd bench && make`

## Running the simulator
Call the simulator with parameter "--help" to see all available options to run it.

Example simulation run:

`./swt16/Vswt16_top --simTime 200 --pmemFile ../prog/hex_test_load_store.pmem --dmemFile ../prog/hex_test_load_store.dmem --dmemDump`

In this example, `--simTime <timeUnits>` specifies the number of time units for which the simulation is run.
The option `--pmemFile <filename>` specifies the program file that is loaded into the program memory.
Similarly, `--dmemFile <filename>` specifies the data file that is loaded into the data memory. 

## Examining the processor state over time
When running, the simulation generates a VCD file that tracks the changes of the internal state of the processor over time.
Once the simulation has finished, the internal state of the processor during the simulation can be visualized using GTKWAVE.

Example state inspection with GTKWAVE: 

`gtkwave ./swt16/Vswt16_top.vcd -a gtkwave_views/swt16.view.gtkw &`

## Writing a program
Currently, this project contains no tooling to generate machine code for the processor (not even an assembler/disassembler).
This means, the programmer has to write the machine code themselves.
For a limited-size ISA like the one used for this project, this is actually still feasible (and sometimes even fun!).
Examples progams can be found in the [prog] directory. They contain extensive comments that help to understand the machine code.
Refer to [doc/ISA.odt] for an overview of the current state of the ISA.

## Note
This project is developed and tested using Ubuntu.

Commit message:

updating readme after implementing stalling

README.md, after:

# swt16
A sweet 16 bit processor

## Overview
This project contains a register transfer level (RTL) description of a 16-bit processor with a classic five stage RISC pipeline.
The RTL description is done in Verilog.

The pipeline stages are instruction fetch (FE), decode (DC), execute (EX), memory access (MEM), and register writeback (WB).
Regarding memory interfaces, the processor is designed according to the Harvard architecture, i.e., it has separate program and data memories.
More information on the classic five stage pipeline can be found on [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classic_RISC_pipeline).
The processor design implements bypassing/forwarding.
When a read-after-write (RAW) data hazard cannot be resolved by bypassing/forwarding, the pipeline stalls.

This project also contains a simulator for the RTL design.
The RTL simulator is built using [Verilator](https://www.veripool.org/).
Verilator is open source. It can be downloaded from Github or obtained from the Ubuntu packet manager.

## Directory structure
```
├── bench        : Simulator directory
├── doc          : ISA documentation
├── prog         : Example / test programs
├── README.md    : This readme
└── rtl          : Processor description in Verilog
```
## Prerequisites
Make sure Verilator is installed before attempting to run or build the simulator.
If you want to visualize the processor state during the simulation, you will also need [GTKWAVE](http://gtkwave.sourceforge.net/).
To install Verilator and GTKWAVE, execute the following command (on Ubuntu Linux):

`sudo apt-get install verilator gtkwave`

## Building the simulator
Build the simulator by calling make from [bench]. After that, the simulator will be located in [bench/swt16/Vswt16_top].

`cd bench && make`

## Running the simulator
Call the simulator with parameter "--help" to see all available options to run it.

Example simulation run:

`./swt16/Vswt16_top --simTime 200 --pmemFile ../prog/hex_test_load_store.pmem --dmemFile ../prog/hex_test_load_store.dmem --dmemDump`

In this example, `--simTime <timeUnits>` specifies the number of time units for which the simulation is run.
The option `--pmemFile <filename>` specifies the program file that is loaded into the program memory.
Similarly, `--dmemFile <filename>` specifies the data file that is loaded into the data memory. 

## Examining the processor state over time
When running, the simulation generates a VCD file that tracks the changes of the internal state of the processor over time.
Once the simulation has finished, the internal state of the processor during the simulation can be visualized using GTKWAVE.

Example state inspection with GTKWAVE: 

`gtkwave ./swt16/Vswt16_top.vcd -a gtkwave_views/swt16.view.gtkw &`

## Writing a program
Currently, this project contains no tooling to generate machine code for the processor (not even an assembler/disassembler).
This means, the programmer has to write the machine code themselves.
For a limited-size ISA like the one used for this project, this is actually still feasible (and sometimes even fun!).
Examples progams can be found in the [prog] directory. They contain extensive comments that help to understand the machine code.
Refer to [doc/ISA.odt] for an overview of the current state of the ISA.

## Note
This project is developed and tested using Ubuntu.
